Java Programming Basics 
Java is one of the most popular and widely used programming language and platform. A platform is an environment that helps to develop and run programs written in any programming language.
Java is fast, reliable and secure. From desktop to web applications, scientific supercomputers to gaming consoles, cell phones to the Internet, Java is used in every nook and corner. 

However to become proficient in any programming language, one Firstly needs to understand the basics of that language. 

Therefore, below are the basics of Java in the format in which it will help you the most to get the headstart: 

Java Environment: The programming environment of Java consists of three components mainly: 
JDK 
JRE 
JVM 
Learn about setting up the Java environment here: Setting up the environment in Java 

Java Basic Syntax: Every programming language has its own set of rules to declare, define and work on its components. Reading and learning about all of them together is difficult. Therefore here is a simple task of printing “Hello World” in Java. During this process, major components and their syntaxes are explained clearly. 
Learn about printing “Hello World” in Java here: Beginning Java programming with Hello World Example 

Comments in Java: In a program, comments take part in making the program become more human-readable by placing the detail of code involved and proper use of comments makes maintenance easier and finding bugs easily. Comments are ignored by the compiler while compiling the code. 
Learn about Comments in Java here: Comments in Java 

Data Types in Java: Each variable in Java has an associated data type. Each data type requires different amounts of memory and has some specific operations which can be performed over it. 
Learn about different data types in Java here: Data types in Java 

Variables in Java: A variable is the name given to a memory location. It is the basic unit of storage in a program. 
Learn about Variables in Java here: Variables in Java 

Keywords in Java: Keywords or Reserved words are the words in a language that are used for some internal process or represent some predefined actions. These words are therefore not allowed to use as variable names or objects. Doing this will result in a compile-time error. 
Learn about Keywords in Java here: Keywords in Java 

Operators in Java: Operators are the foundation of any programming language. Thus the functionality of Java programming language is incomplete without the use of operators. We can define operators as symbols that help us to perform specific mathematical and logical computations on operands. In other words, we can say that an operator operates the operands. 
Learn about Operators in Java here: Operators in Java 

Decision Making (Control Statements) in Java: Decision Making in programming is similar to decision making in real life. In programming also we face some situations where we want a certain block of code to be executed when some condition is fulfilled. 
A programming language uses control statements to control the flow of execution of the program based on certain conditions. These are used to cause the flow of execution to advance and branch based on changes to the state of a program. 
Learn about Decision Making in Java here: Decision Making in Java 

Loops in Java: Looping in programming languages is a feature which facilitates the execution of a set of instructions/functions repeatedly while some condition evaluates to true. 
Java provides three ways for executing the loops. While all the ways provide similar basic functionality, they differ in their syntax and condition checking time. 
Learn about Loops in Java here: Loops in Java